Multi cell database/mq adoption (#746)
openstack-k8s-operators/data-plane-adoption: docs_user/modules/proc_retrieving-topology-specific-service-configuration.adoc

.Prerequisites

. Define the following shell variables. Replace the example values with values that are correct for your environment:
+
----
$ PASSWORD_FILE="$HOME/overcloud-passwords.yaml"
$ NAMESPACE="openstack"
ifeval::["{build}" != "downstream"]
$ MARIADB_IMAGE=quay.io/podified-antelope-centos9/openstack-mariadb:current-podified
endif::[]
ifeval::["{build}" == "downstream"]
$ MARIADB_IMAGE=registry.redhat.io/rhosp-dev-preview/openstack-mariadb-rhel9:18.0
endif::[]
$ declare -A TRIPLEO_PASSWORDS

> ifeval::["{OpenStackPreviousInstaller}" != "director_operator"]

Reviewer: This ifeval will have to change. I don't think we've settled on one yet, so I won't put an example here. This is an FYI.

$ CELLS="default"
$ for CELL in $(echo $CELLS); do
>    TRIPLEO_PASSWORDS[$CELL]="$PASSWORD_FILE"
> done
endif::[]
ifeval::["{OpenStackPreviousInstaller}" == "director_operator"]
$ CELLS="default"
$ for CELL in $(echo $CELLS); do
>     oc get secret tripleo-passwords -n $NAMESPACE -o json | jq -r '.data["tripleo-overcloud-passwords.yaml"]' | base64 -d >"$TRIPLEO_PASSWORDS[$CELL]"
> done
endif::[]
$ declare -A SOURCE_DB_ROOT_PASSWORD
$ for CELL in $(echo $CELLS); do
>     SOURCE_DB_ROOT_PASSWORD[$CELL]=$(cat ${TRIPLEO_PASSWORDS[$CELL]} | grep ' MysqlRootPassword:' | awk -F ': ' '{ print $2; }')
> done
----
+

> ifeval::["{OpenStackPreviousInstaller}" == "director_operator"]

Reviewer: Same comment. This ifeval will have to change.

> * You can only have a single Nova compute cell deployed on the source cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You can only deploy a single Compute cell on the source cloud.
```
Do you need "Nova" to describe the cell? If so, feel free to reinstate it.

Reviewer: @bogdando ^

. Get the name of the {OpenShiftShort} node where the {OpenStackShort} Controller virtual machine is running:
+
----
$ export CONTROLLER_NODE=$(oc get vmi -ojson | jq -r '.items[0].status.nodeName')
$ export SOURCE_OVN_OVSDB_IP=172.17.0.160 # get this from the source OVN DB
----

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer: @bogdando ^

ifeval::["{OpenStackPreviousInstaller}" != "director_operator"]
$ MARIADB_CLIENT_ANNOTATIONS='--annotations=k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks=internalapi'
$ MARIADB_RUN_OVERRIDES="$MARIADB_CLIENT_ANNOTATIONS"

ifeval::["{build}" != "downstream"]
$ CONTROLLER1_SSH="ssh -i ~/install_yamls/out/edpm/ansibleee-ssh-key-id_rsa root@192.168.122.100"
endif::[]
ifeval::["{build}" == "downstream"]
$ CONTROLLER1_SSH="ssh -i *<path to SSH key>* root@*<node IP>*"
endif::[]
endif::[]
ifeval::["{OpenStackPreviousInstaller}" == "director_operator"]
$ MARIADB_CLIENT_ANNOTATIONS="-n $NAMESPACE"
$ MARIADB_RUN_OVERRIDES="--overrides=${RUN_OVERRIDES} $MARIADB_CLIENT_ANNOTATIONS"

$ CONTROLLER1_SSH="oc -n $NAMESPACE rsh -c openstackclient openstackclient ssh controller-0.ctlplane"
$ oc get secret tripleo-passwords -n $NAMESPACE -o json | jq -r '.data["tripleo-overcloud-passwords.yaml"]' |
base64 -d >"${PASSWORD_FILE}"
endif::[]

$ declare -A SOURCE_MARIADB_IP
$ SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[default]=*<galera cluster VIP>*
ifeval::["{OpenStackPreviousInstaller}" != "director_operator"]
$ SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[cell1]=*<galera cell1 cluster VIP>*
$ SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[cell2]=*<galera cell2 cluster VIP>*
# ...
endif::[]
----
+

> * Complete `CONTROLLER1_SSH` settings with SSH connection details for any non-cell controller of the source {OpenStackPreviousInstaller} cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Complete `CONTROLLER1_SSH` settings with SSH connection details for any non-cell Controller of the source {OpenStackPreviousInstaller} cloud.
```

* For each cell defined in `CELLS`, replace `SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[*]= ...`, and complete the records lists for the cell names and VIP addresses of MariaDB Galera clusters, include cells, of the source {OpenStackPreviousInstaller} cloud.
* To get the values for `SOURCE_MARIADB_IP`, query the puppet-generated configurations in a Controller
ifeval::["{OpenStackPreviousInstaller}" != "director_operator"]
and CellController
endif::[]
node:
+
----
$ sudo grep -rI 'listen mysql' -A10 /var/lib/config-data/puppet-generated/ | grep bind
----

> +
> 
> [NOTE]
> The source cloud always uses the same password for cells' databases by design.
> For that reason, we chose to use the same passwords file for all cells' stacks.
> There is a split-stack topology, however, that allows using different passwords
> files for each stack.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
[NOTE]
The source cloud always uses the same password for cells databases by design.
For that reason, the same passwords file is used for all cells stacks.
There is a split-stack topology, however, that allows using different passwords
files for each stack.

```

.Procedure

. Export the shell variables for the following outputs and test the connection to the {OpenStackShort} database:
+
----
$ unset PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_DATABASES
$ declare -xA PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_DATABASES
$ for CELL in $(echo $CELLS); do
>     PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_DATABASES[$CELL]=$(oc run mariadb-client-1-$CELL ${MARIADB_RUN_OVERRIDES} -q --image ${MARIADB_IMAGE} -i --rm --restart=Never -- \
>         mysql -rsh "${SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[$CELL]}" -uroot -p"${SOURCE_DB_ROOT_PASSWORD[$CELL]}" -e 'SHOW databases;')
> done
----
+
[NOTE]

> The `nova`, `nova_api`, and `nova_cell0` databases are inlcuded in the same database host for the main overcloud Heat stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `nova`, `nova_api`, and `nova_cell0` databases are included in the same database host for the main overcloud {orchestration_first_ref} stack.
```

Reviewer: @bogdando ^

ifeval::["{OpenStackPreviousInstaller}" != "director_operator"]
Additional cells use the `nova` database of their local Galera clusters.
endif::[]

. Run `mysqlcheck` on the {OpenStackShort} database to check for inaccuracies:
+
----
$ unset PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_MYSQLCHECK_NOK
$ declare -xA PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_MYSQLCHECK_NOK
$ run_mysqlcheck() {
>     PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_MYSQLCHECK_NOK=$(oc run mariadb-client-2-$1 ${MARIADB_RUN_OVERRIDES} -q --image ${MARIADB_IMAGE} -i --rm --restart=Never -- \
>         mysqlcheck --all-databases -h ${SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[$CELL]} -u root -p"${SOURCE_DB_ROOT_PASSWORD[$CELL]}" | grep -v OK)
> }
$ for CELL in $(echo $CELLS); do
>     run_mysqlcheck $CELL
> done
$ if [ "$PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_MYSQLCHECK_NOK" != "" ]; then
>     for CELL in $(echo $CELLS); do
>         MYSQL_UPGRADE=$(oc run mariadb-client-3 ${MARIADB_RUN_OVERRIDES} -q --image ${MARIADB_IMAGE} -i --rm --restart=Never -- \
>             mysql_upgrade -v -h ${SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[$CELL]} -u root -p"${SOURCE_DB_ROOT_PASSWORD[$CELL]}")
>         # rerun mysqlcheck to check if problem is resolved
>         run_mysqlcheck
>     done
> fi
----

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer: @bogdando ^

. Get the {compute_service_first_ref} cell mappings:
+
----
export PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_NOVADB_MAPPED_CELLS=$(oc run mariadb-client-1 ${MARIADB_RUN_OVERRIDES} -q --image ${MARIADB_IMAGE} -i --rm --restart=Never -- \
    mysql -rsh "${SOURCE_MARIADB_IP['default]}" -uroot -p"${SOURCE_DB_ROOT_PASSWORD['default']}" nova_api -e \
    'select uuid,name,transport_url,database_connection,disabled from cell_mappings;')
----

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer: @bogdando ^

. Get the hostnames of the registered Compute services:
+
----
$ unset PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_NOVA_COMPUTE_HOSTNAMES
$ declare -xA PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_NOVA_COMPUTE_HOSTNAMES
$ for CELL in $(echo $CELLS); do
>     PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_NOVA_COMPUTE_HOSTNAMES[$CELL]=$(oc run mariadb-client-4-$CELL ${MARIADB_RUN_OVERRIDES} -q --image ${MARIADB_IMAGE} -i --rm --restart=Never -- \
>         mysql -rsh "${SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[$CELL]}" -uroot -p"${SOURCE_DB_ROOT_PASSWORD[$CELL]}" -e \
>             "select host from nova.services where services.binary='nova-compute';")
> done
----

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer: @bogdando ^

>     mysqlcheck --all-databases -h ${SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[$CELL]} -u root -p${SOURCE_DB_ROOT_PASSWORD[$CELL]} | grep -v OK)"
> PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_NOVA_COMPUTE_HOSTNAMES[$CELL]="$(oc run mariadb-client-7-$CELL ${MARIADB_RUN_OVERRIDES} -q --image ${MARIADB_IMAGE} -i --rm --restart=Never -- \
>     mysql -rsh ${SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[$CELL]} -uroot -p${SOURCE_DB_ROOT_PASSWORD[$CELL]} -e \
>     "select host from nova.services where services.binary='nova-compute';")"
> EOF
> done
$ cat >> ~/.source_cloud_exported_variables_default << EOF
> PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_NOVADB_MAPPED_CELLS="$(oc run mariadb-client-2 ${MARIADB_RUN_OVERRIDES} -q --image ${MARIADB_IMAGE} -i --rm --restart=Never -- \
>     mysql -rsh ${SOURCE_MARIADB_IP['default']} -uroot -p${SOURCE_DB_ROOT_PASSWORD['default']} -e \
>     'select uuid,name,transport_url,database_connection,disabled from nova_api.cell_mappings;' || echo None)"
> PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_NOVAMANAGE_CELL_MAPPINGS="$($CONTROLLER1_SSH sudo podman exec -it nova_conductor nova-manage cell_v2 list_cells)"
> EOF
$ chmod 0600 ~/.source_cloud_exported_variables*
----
+

> <1> If `neutron-sriov-nic-agent` agents are running in your {OpenStackShort} deployment, get the configuration to use for the data plane adoption

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> If `neutron-sriov-nic-agent` agents are running in your {OpenStackShort} deployment, get the configuration to use for the data plane adoption.
```
Where do you get this configuration?

Author: This is probably a formatting change only, I was not introducing this statement in the 1st place, so I cannot answer to that question (@karelyatin perchance? we could address that improvement to SR-IOV adoption guide in follow up)

Reviewer: @bogdando ^

> 
> [NOTE]
> ====
> This configuration will be required later, during the data plane adoption post-checks.
> ====

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
[NOTE]
====
This configuration is required later, during the data plane adoption post-checks.
====
```

+
----
$ cpexport=$(oc -n "${NAMESPACE}" get cm tripleo-exports-default -o json | jq -r '.data["ctlplane-export.yaml"]')
$ declare -A SOURCE_MARIADB_IP
$ for CELL in $(echo $CELLS); do
>     SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[$CELL]=$(echo "$cpexport" | sed -e '0,/ MysqlInternal/d' | sed -n '0,/host_nobrackets/s/^.*host_nobrackets\:\s*\(.*\)$/\1/p')
> done
$ RUN_OVERRIDES='{
>     "apiVersion": "v1",
>     "metadata": {
>         "annotations": {
>             "k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks": "[{\"name\": \"internalapi-static\",\"namespace\": \"openstack\", \"ips\":[\"172.17.0.99/24\"]}]"
>         }
>     },
>     "spec": {
>         "nodeName": "'"$CONTROLLER_NODE"'",
>         "securityContext": {
>             "allowPrivilegeEscalation": false,
>             "capabilities": {
>                 "drop": ["ALL"]
>             },
>             "runAsNonRoot": true,
>             "seccompProfile": {
>                 "type": "RuntimeDefault"
>             }
>         }
>     }
> }'
----
+
* With OSPdO, the `mariadb-client` needs to run on the same {rhocp_long} node where the {OpenStackShort} Controller node is running. In addition, the `internalapi-static` network needs to be attached to the pod.

> endif::[]

Author: yes

. Define the following shell variables. Replace the example values with values that are correct for your environment:
+
----
ifeval::["{OpenStackPreviousInstaller}" != "director_operator"]
$ MARIADB_CLIENT_ANNOTATIONS='--annotations=k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks=internalapi'
$ MARIADB_RUN_OVERRIDES="$MARIADB_CLIENT_ANNOTATIONS"

ifeval::["{build}" != "downstream"]
$ CONTROLLER1_SSH="ssh -i ~/install_yamls/out/edpm/ansibleee-ssh-key-id_rsa root@192.168.122.100"
endif::[]
ifeval::["{build}" == "downstream"]
$ CONTROLLER1_SSH="ssh -i *<path to SSH key>* root@*<node IP>*"
endif::[]
endif::[]

> ifeval::["{OpenStackPreviousInstaller}" == "director_operator"]

Author: done

$ MARIADB_RUN_OVERRIDES="--overrides=${RUN_OVERRIDES} $MARIADB_CLIENT_ANNOTATIONS"

$ CONTROLLER1_SSH="oc -n $NAMESPACE rsh -c openstackclient openstackclient ssh controller-0.ctlplane"
$ oc get secret tripleo-passwords -n $NAMESPACE -o json | jq -r '.data["tripleo-overcloud-passwords.yaml"]' |
base64 -d >"${PASSWORD_FILE}"
endif::[]

$ declare -A SOURCE_MARIADB_IP
$ SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[default]=*<galera cluster VIP>*
ifeval::["{OpenStackPreviousInstaller}" != "director_operator"]
$ SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[cell1]=*<galera cell1 cluster VIP>*
$ SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[cell2]=*<galera cell2 cluster VIP>*
# ...
endif::[]
----
+
* Complete `CONTROLLER1_SSH` settings with SSH connection details for any non-cell controller of the source {OpenStackPreviousInstaller} cloud.
* For each cell defined in `CELLS`, replace `SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[*]= ...`, and complete the records lists for the cell names and VIP addresses of MariaDB Galera clusters, include cells, of the source {OpenStackPreviousInstaller} cloud.
* To get the values for `SOURCE_MARIADB_IP`, query the puppet-generated configurations in a Controller
ifeval::["{OpenStackPreviousInstaller}" != "director_operator"]
and CellController
endif::[]

> node:

Author: I recalled it now, there is no multicell topology supported for OSPdO for today. This is why we do not mention that  in such a case.

+
----
$ sudo grep -rI 'listen mysql' -A10 /var/lib/config-data/puppet-generated/ | grep bind
----
+

[NOTE]
The source cloud always uses the same password for cells' databases by design.
For that reason, we chose to use the same passwords file for all cells' stacks.
There is a split-stack topology, however, that allows using different passwords
files for each stack.

.Procedure

. Export the shell variables for the following outputs and test the connection to the {OpenStackShort} database:
+
----
$ unset PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_DATABASES
$ declare -xA PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_DATABASES
$ for CELL in $(echo $CELLS); do
>     PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_DATABASES[$CELL]=$(oc run mariadb-client-1-$CELL ${MARIADB_RUN_OVERRIDES} -q --image ${MARIADB_IMAGE} -i --rm --restart=Never -- \
>         mysql -rsh "${SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[$CELL]}" -uroot -p"${SOURCE_DB_ROOT_PASSWORD[$CELL]}" -e 'SHOW databases;')
> done
----
+
[NOTE]
The `nova`, `nova_api`, and `nova_cell0` databases are inlcuded in the same database host for the main overcloud Heat stack.

> ifeval::["{OpenStackPreviousInstaller}" != "director_operator"]

Author: addressed in the rebase

> PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_NOVA_COMPUTE_HOSTNAMES[$CELL]="$(oc run mariadb-client-7-$CELL ${MARIADB_RUN_OVERRIDES} -q --image ${MARIADB_IMAGE} -i --rm --restart=Never -- \
>     mysql -rsh ${SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[$RCELL]} -uroot -p${SOURCE_DB_ROOT_PASSWORD[$RCELL]} -e \
>     "select host from nova.services where services.binary='nova-compute';")"
> if [ "$RCELL" = "default" ]; then
>     PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_NOVADB_MAPPED_CELLS="$(oc run mariadb-client-2 ${MARIADB_RUN_OVERRIDES} -q --image ${MARIADB_IMAGE} -i --rm --restart=Never -- \
>         mysql -rsh ${SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[$RCELL]} -uroot -p${SOURCE_DB_ROOT_PASSWORD[$RCELL]} nova_api -e \
>             'select uuid,name,transport_url,database_connection,disabled from cell_mappings;')"
>     PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_NOVAMANAGE_CELL_MAPPINGS="$($CONTROLLER1_SSH sudo podman exec -it nova_conductor nova-manage cell_v2 list_cells)"
> fi
> EOF
> done
$ chmod 0600 ~/.source_cloud_exported_variables*
----
+
<1> If `neutron-sriov-nic-agent` agents are running in your {OpenStackShort} deployment, get the configuration to use for the data plane adoption
+
[NOTE]
====

> This configuration is required later, during the data plane adoption post-checks.

Reviewer: Does "this configuration" refer to the configuration for the `neutron-sriov-nic-agent` agents?

Author: addressed

.Prerequisites

> . Define the following shell variables. Replace the example values with values that are correct for your environment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Define the following shell variables. Replace the example values with values that are correct for your environment:
```

$ CONTROLLER1_SSH="oc -n $NAMESPACE rsh -c openstackclient openstackclient ssh controller-0.ctlplane"
$ oc get secret tripleo-passwords -n $NAMESPACE -o json | jq -r '.data["tripleo-overcloud-passwords.yaml"]' |
base64 -d >"${PASSWORD_FILE}"
endif::[]

$ declare -A SOURCE_MARIADB_IP
$ SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[default]=*<galera cluster VIP>*
ifeval::["{build_variant}" != "ospdo"]
$ SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[cell1]=*<galera cell1 cluster VIP>*
$ SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[cell2]=*<galera cell2 cluster VIP>*
# ...
endif::[]
----
+
* Provide `CONTROLLER1_SSH` settings with SSH connection details for any non-cell Controller of the source {OpenStackPreviousInstaller} cloud.
* For each cell that is defined in `CELLS`, replace `SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[*]= ...`, with the records lists for the cell names and VIP addresses of MariaDB Galera clusters, including the cells, of the source {OpenStackPreviousInstaller} cloud.
* To get the values for `SOURCE_MARIADB_IP`, query the puppet-generated configurations in a Controller
ifeval::["{build_variant}" != "ospdo"]
and CellController
endif::[]
node:
+
----
$ sudo grep -rI 'listen mysql' -A10 /var/lib/config-data/puppet-generated/ | grep bind
----
+

[NOTE]

> The source cloud always uses the same password for cells databases. For that reason, the same passwords file is used for all cells stacks. There is a split-stack topology, however, that allows using different passwords
> files for each stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The source cloud always uses the same password for cells databases. For that reason, the same passwords file is used for all cells stacks. However, split-stack topology allows using different passwords files for each stack.
```

> PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_NOVA_COMPUTE_HOSTNAMES[$CELL]="$(oc run mariadb-client-7-$CELL ${MARIADB_RUN_OVERRIDES} -q --image ${MARIADB_IMAGE} -i --rm --restart=Never -- \
>     mysql -rsh ${SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[$RCELL]} -uroot -p${SOURCE_DB_ROOT_PASSWORD[$RCELL]} -e \
>     "select host from nova.services where services.binary='nova-compute';")"
> if [ "$RCELL" = "default" ]; then
>     PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_NOVADB_MAPPED_CELLS="$(oc run mariadb-client-2 ${MARIADB_RUN_OVERRIDES} -q --image ${MARIADB_IMAGE} -i --rm --restart=Never -- \
>         mysql -rsh ${SOURCE_MARIADB_IP[$RCELL]} -uroot -p${SOURCE_DB_ROOT_PASSWORD[$RCELL]} nova_api -e \
>             'select uuid,name,transport_url,database_connection,disabled from cell_mappings;')"
>     PULL_OPENSTACK_CONFIGURATION_NOVAMANAGE_CELL_MAPPINGS="$($CONTROLLER1_SSH sudo podman exec -it nova_conductor nova-manage cell_v2 list_cells)"
> fi
> EOF
> done
$ chmod 0600 ~/.source_cloud_exported_variables*
----
+
<1> If `neutron-sriov-nic-agent` agents are running in your {OpenStackShort} deployment, get the configuration to use for the data plane adoption
+
[NOTE]
====

> This configuration and the exported variables will be required later, during the data plane adoption post-checks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configuration and the exported variables are required later, during the data plane adoption post-checks.
```
